---
layout: post
title: Thursday, May 31, 2018
published: true
---

A small SCRUM team of 5 well meaning members, 4 days into the sprint.

---

#### Person 1

Got conflicts merging in from develop, in advance of creating a PR for the work they'd done yesterday. Found out the thing they'd worked on was already done by Person 3 on Monday. Person 1 was on Person 3's PR, and approved it. Person 1 was also present at stand up on Monday where Person 3 outlined the job they was going to do.

#### Person 2

Went to start their task for the day, at 1:40pm, and found that Person 1 had already completed it in the course of their task, which was for different functionality. Person 2 was advised to work on the bug list until Person 1 had finished, but it would be good to revisit that task later to improve the usability and features. Person 2 proceeded to close the task.

#### Person 3

Spent the day trying to resolve a bug in production that could not be reproduced in any other environment. Ended up discovering that whilst the code had calls to a logging interface, those calls didn't actually go to a logging library. They did go to an exception handling library, but it threw an exception whenever anyone tried to view the exception detail. A hotfix release was created to make the logging methods call the logger, and upon re-deployment the bug was no longer reproducible.

#### Person 4

Spent the day working on a task unrelated to the current sprint goal.

#### Person 5

Is on sick leave, though did optimistically turn up at stand up and babble incoherently for a few minutes.

---

Sadly this doesn't count as a particularly remarkable day.

"This is not the comedy we intended to do when the week began." - Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip

Further reading: [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Farce](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Farce)